In building a machine learning model,
we distinguished between the data that we will use to train that model,
which we call the training data,
with a subset of that data that is held out from
model training but used to test the fit of the model,
which we call the test data.
For your model to perform well in production,
it's critically important that the training data used to build that model be as
representative as possible of the data that
will ultimately pass to that model in production.
For example, consider the case of a natural language processing based message classifier.
As customer inquiry messages come in,
they may specifically address issues with certain product lines.
If these messages can be automatically classified
and routed to specialists particular to those lines,
we can save a great deal of time and provide better customer service.
We run into a challenge however,
when product lines change.
If we train our model based on data from the first half of the year,
for example, and then in the second half of the year we launch a new product line,
we should not expect our model to be able to classify messages according to
that new product line because it was never trained
on messages associated with that product line in the first place.
In this case, the training data is not
representative of the data that is encountered by the model in production.
There two particular forms of bias that may occur in training data.
First of all is known as convenience bias.
Some types of data may just be easier to collect than other types of data.
If this more convenient data is not
fully representative of the full variety of data that will be encountered in production,
this can skew the data you have available in your ground truth data set,
the one you use to train your model,
which subsequently skews your machine learning model.
A second source of training data bias is recency.
You may have gathered more data recently than in the past for some reason.
This may not be a problem unless that data is skewed for some reason
and does not represent the full variety of
data that the machine learning model will encounter in the future.
It's critically important to ensure that any machine learning model has been built on
data that is most representative of how that model will be used in the future.